February 24, 2003
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/display/book/9781589061781/ch002.xml

2 How Fast Can China Grow?
Over the past two decades, China has been one of the fastest-growing countries in the world.1 Growth in real GDP per capita has exceeded 8 percent a year on average, an impressive achievement even by East Asian standards. China’s exceptional growth performance has been spurred by market-oriented structural reforms introduced since the late 1970s, which have also resulted in sizable productivity gains. However, annual GDP growth has declined since 1993, to 7–8 percent in 1999–2001, raising questions about to what extent China’s impressive track record can be sustained in the future. Although most analysts believe some slowdown is inevitable, it is difficult to assess China’s future growth potential given the deep structural reforms under way, the vast scale of the Chinese economy, and the complexities of its growth dynamics.

This chapter examines the dynamics of China’s growth performance and attempts to shed light on how fast the country might grow in the future. In contrast with earlier empirical work, it seeks to identify and estimate the contributions of the sources of total factor productivity (TFP) growth, which explains most of the increase in output growth during the reform period. The chapter shows that China’s growth performance has been underpinned by a large-scale reallocation of agricultural labor to more productive uses and by other productivity-enhancing structural changes.

The main policy implication that emerges is that China’s growth prospects will continue to depend on structural reform. However, many of the earlier reforms had a one-time impact on productivity growth, which suggests that future growth is unlikely to match that of the past two decades. In addition, future structural reforms—involving considerable labor shedding by state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the shutting down of nonviable enterprises and outdated production capacity—could cause some disruptions in the labor market and slow the absorption of agricultural labor in the short term. Nevertheless, potential output should be able to grow at 7–8 percent a year over the medium term, provided reforms of the SOEs and the financial sector accelerate following China’s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO).

Structural Reform
Overview of the Reform Period
China’s reform strategy over the past 20 or more years can best be described as incremental. Reforms followed a dual-track approach in which a market track was established in parallel with the preexisting tracks of the centrally planned economy, with the former gradually increasing in importance over time.2 This dual-track approach was initiated in late 1978 with the rapid and comprehensive liberalization of the agriculture sector.

The agricultural reforms quickly allowed a substantial proportion of economic activity and of the labor force to move outside of central planning. The main feature of the agricultural reform was the replacement of the commune-brigade system of collective farming with a system in which communal land was leased to individual peasant households. Although households remained responsible for delivering a portion of their farm output to the state, they were allowed to sell any production above the state procurement quota on the free market. The quota was essentially a lump-sum tax, so that rural households effectively faced market-determined prices in making their production decisions.

The impressive growth of agricultural output resulting from the initial market-oriented reforms also facilitated the liberalization of the industrial and services sectors in rural and urban areas that followed in the 1980s. The growth of the nonstate sector was also allowed to spread well beyond the communes themselves. The regulations governing the registration and supervision of nonstate enterprises were progressively liberalized beginning in 1984, and the result was rapid industrialization, particularly by community-owned enterprises in rural areas, which came to be known as township and village enterprises (TVEs). Thus the dismantling of the communes and the emergence of the TVEs exposed nearly 800 million rural inhabitants (some 80 percent of the population at the time) to market forces and provided a large proportion of them the opportunity to leave agriculture over a relatively brief time span.

Another purpose of the dual-track approach was to integrate China into the global economy. In 1980 four southern coastal cities—Shantou, Shenzhen, Xiamen, and Zhuhai—were designated as special economic zones (SEZs). They were provided certain discretionary powers over taxation and were given autonomy to experiment with new institutional forms, such as foreign-funded enterprises. In addition, SOEs operating in the SEZs were exempted from many elements of the central plan, such as certain labor regulations and the tax code. With the phenomenal initial growth of the SEZs, the privileges they were granted spread quickly to other areas, including Hainan, which became the fifth SEZ in 1988 (Chapter 5).

In contrast to reform in agriculture, the pace of reform in the SOE and financial sectors was initially more gradual. SOEs were not privatized, and indeed, they only became a key focus of reform in the mid-1990s. Instead the SOEs were the target of various attempts to introduce more market-based incentives to improve management and operational efficiency within the framework of state ownership. Beginning in 1984, decision-making power over production, marketing, and investment matters was incrementally devolved to SOE managers. However, it was not until Deng Xiaoping’s celebrated tour of the southern provinces in January 1992 that the authorities formally embraced the view that the market system was not incompatible with socialism, and this change set the stage for a deepening of SOE and financial sector reform.3 The initial focus was on moving small enterprises out of the state sector, placing large enterprises on a commercial footing, and shifting the burden of lending for policy purposes away from the state commercial banks. Following the Fifteenth Party Congress in September 1997, these reforms were expanded and accelerated.

China’s reforms have facilitated a profound transformation of the country’s economic structure and social development:

The proportion of the labor force engaged in agriculture has fallen from nearly three-fourths in the late 1970s to less than half, and the proportion of industrial output produced by SOEs declined from nearly 80 percent to about one-quarter over the same period.

Total trade (imports plus exports) rose from less than 10 percent of GDP in the late 1970s to just over 40 percent, and foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows have risen from virtually zero at the beginning of the 1980s to over $40 billion a year in recent years.

Human development indicators—including life expectancy, literacy, infant mortality, and income per capita—have also improved dramatically. Indeed, the rapid growth and structural change witnessed in China over the past 20 years have delivered perhaps the greatest reduction in poverty in recorded history: 200 million people have ceased to be poor, where poverty is measured by China’s official poverty line; the corresponding figure based on the World Bank’s criterion (living on $1 or less a day) is considerably higher.

Although China’s gradual approach to economic reform has had considerable success, some analysts have pointed out that it has also incurred significant costs (Lardy, 1998). In particular, the slow pace of SOE reform, although arguably necessary to maintain social stability, has contributed to growing SOE losses. These have largely been financed through the banking system and have led to a sharp deterioration in asset quality, reflected in rising nonperforming loans. In the past several years, owing to mounting problems in these areas and lessons learned from the Asian crisis, reform of the SOEs and the financial sector have moved to the top of the authorities’ policy agenda (Chapters 9 and 10).

The Contribution of Structural Reform to Output Growth
Although little empirical work has been done to estimate the contribution of structural reform to growth directly, a number of growth accounting studies have attempted to measure this contribution indirectly.4 Three main channels have been identified:

Raising TFP growth directly. The literature agrees on the strong linkage between structural reform and the rapid productivity growth over the past two decades. TFP growth was found to be particularly high following the liberalization of the agricultural sector in the early 1980s, and in the early 1990s after marketoriented reforms were accelerated, and to have been well above that of the prereform period (1952–78).5 Estimates of TFP growth during the reform period range between 2 and 4 percent a year.6

Raising aggregate TFP growth through facilitating a more efficient allocation of labor. A reallocation of labor from agriculture to other sectors increases aggregate output if the marginal product of labor is lower in agriculture than in the other sectors. A study by Chow (1993) indicates that there was indeed scope for efficiency gains through labor reallocation at the beginning of the reform period: Chow estimated that, in 1978, the marginal product of labor was only 63 yuan in agriculture but Y 1,027 in industry, Y 452 in construction, Y 739 in transport, and Y 1,809 in commerce. The empirical estimates of the impact of labor reallocation on TFP growth generally fall into a range of ½–2 percentage points, or up to about half the estimated productivity growth.

Enhancing the efficiency of capital accumulation and knowledge spillovers. An economy that is more efficient at mobilizing and transforming savings into physical and human capital can realize higher growth rates. The increased marketization and opening of the Chinese economy are widely believed to have improved the efficiency of capital accumulation during the reform period. The rapid increase in FDI is considered to be a particularly important explanatory variable, as is the substantial spillover of technology and managerial know-how from the large number of joint ventures and wholly owned foreign enterprises (Chapters 5 and 6).

Potential Output and Its Components
This section reports the results of several different empirical approaches to identify the main determinants of China’s potential output growth over the period 1970–98.7 Because TFP growth has been identified as a major contributor to the increase in output growth during the reform period, it is important to examine its determinants, in particular, structural reform and labor migration from agriculture to other sectors.

The Hodrick-Prescott Filter
A commonly applied approach to decomposing actual output into its long-run potential and cyclical components is the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter. This is a statistical method that does not use any information regarding the determinants of each of the components, but is a useful first approximation of potential output growth. Let Yt and Ŷt be the logarithms of, respectively, actual and potential output at time t; then the cyclical components are given by εt = Yt – Ŷt. Hence HP filtering decomposes Yt into Ŷt and εt.

When applied to China’s real GDP, the HP approach reveals that potential output growth picked up strongly during the reform period (Figure 2.1). It peaked at 9.6 percent in 1985–87 and then slowed somewhat in the late 1980s. In the first half of the 1990s, when the reform process was reinvigorated, potential output growth rebounded, peaking at 9.9 percent in 1994–95, but it has since tapered off again.

However, the HP approach suffers from what has been called the endpoint problem: future potential output growth may be overestimated if actual output growth was comparatively high (or underestimated if it was comparatively low) at the end of the sample period. In the case of China, this could mean that the slowdown in potential output in the second half of the 1990s was actually more pronounced than the HP filter suggests. This would also imply that the estimated output gap is smaller.

The Production Function Approach
Another approach that is often used to determine potential output is the production function approach, which makes use of information regarding the sources of growth, namely, factor accumulation and TFP growth. The production function approach is described in Appendix II and can be represented as follows:
where At represents TFP, βt is a coefficient vector, and zt is a vector of factor inputs, all measured at time t. Potential output is given by Ŷt = At + βtzt. Often, zt contains only capital and labor, and when constant returns to scale are imposed, the elements in βt must sum to 1.

Neither At nor βt can be directly observed, but there are several ways to calculate TFP and the other parameters of the production function. If constant returns to scale are imposed and the only factor inputs are capital and labor, the parameters can be directly obtained from the national accounts by calculating the share of labor income in GDP; 1 minus this share is then the capital share parameter. The next step is to substitute these parameters into the production function and calculate the Solow residuals: Yt – βtzt = At + εt. These residuals are the sum of TFP and the cyclical components in actual output. The time series of Solow residuals can be decomposed into At and εt through filtering or by regression on a set of variables, xt, that are sources of TFP growth.

Hu and Khan (1996) constructed a time series of labor shares using Chinese national accounts data and a translog production function to calculate TFP growth for the 1953–94 period. Extending their series of labor shares to 1998, we calculated the contributions to potential output growth of capital accumulation, labor force growth, and TFP growth for 1971–98 (Figure 2.2; Table 2.1). In the prereform period, capital accumulation was the main contributor to potential output growth. The contributions of labor force growth and TFP growth were small and negative, respectively. However, TFP growth picked up strongly during the reform period and explains much of the increase in potential output growth during this period. Output gaps were also calculated on the basis of the production function approach, the pattern of which is very similar to that of the output gaps derived with the HP filter.

Another way of calculating βt and TFP is by regressing Yt on zt and xt. In this case, direct estimates of At, as a function of xt, and εt are obtained. A simple version of this approach is to estimate where yt and kt are the logarithms of output per worker and capital per worker, respectively; C is a constant; and t represents a linear trend. In this specification At = C + δt. Chow (1993) and Chow and Li (1999) used this approach and found a capital share, α, of 0.63. This direct estimate of the capital share parameter exceeds that derived from the national accounts, which is estimated to have been 0.56 on average during 1970–98. Although both estimates are high compared with capital share parameters found in industrial countries, they are not outside the range found in other developing countries.9 Nevertheless, the possibility that they are biased upward cannot be ruled out. This may be the result of omitted variables, in particular human capital, or of measurement error in China’s national accounts. The latter tend to overestimate output in the capital-intensive manufacturing sector and underestimate the output of more labor-intensive private and individual enterprises. It is also possible that the high capital share is a legacy of the previous plan system, which was strongly biased toward investment in capital -intensive heavy industries and was perpetuated through the continuation of state control of the banking system during the reform period.

When China’s output growth is decomposed under the assumption that α = 0.63, the contribution of capital accumulation is larger than when the implicit capital shares from the national accounts are used (Figure 2.3). The Solow residuals are therefore also sensitive to the relative magnitudes of the factor shares. In the case of China, a higher capital share reduces the residual and hence the contribution of TFP growth; during the reform period, TFP growth was 2–2¾ percent a year assuming a constant capital share of 0.63, and 3–4 percent assuming the average capital share from the national accounts of 0.56 over 1970–98 (Table 2.1).

Although the two approaches yield different conclusions about the level of TFP growth, both indicate that TFP growth picked up during the reform period and made a large contribution to the increase in output growth. However, neither approach can explain what caused the pickup in TFP growth. For this it is necessary to estimate an aggregate production function for the Chinese economy that, besides capital and labor, includes explanatory variables for TFP (Table 2.2). Apart from a trend and a trend dummy, explanatory variables in the regression include a structural reform index and a proxy for labor movements out of the primary (largely agricultural) sector.10 The reform index, discussed in Appendix III, is constructed from four variables—the nonstate share of industrial output, the share of total trade in output, the level of urbanization, and the rate of capital formation—that together capture the impact of structural reform on the economy.

Table 2.3 shows the estimated contributions to TFP growth of structural reform, labor migration, and technological progress. What stands out is that labor migration has been a dominant factor in TFP growth both before and during the reform period. On an aggregate level, efficiency-enhancing labor migration shows up in TFP, whereas on a more disaggregated level it would be reflected in the contribution of labor to sectoral output growth. Hence, although the contribution of labor force growth has been small at the aggregate level (Figure 2.4), the reallocation of labor across sectors has been a significant contributor to output growth in the manufacturing and services sectors. This source of TFP growth has not yet been exhausted—the proportion of workers in the primary sector, 50 percent in 2000, is still high compared with more advanced economies—but it will certainly become less important in the long run. The contribution of structural reform has been positive and has added, on average, ¾–1 percentage point to TFP growth and hence to output growth.11 The exogenous trend has been negative but has become less so during the reform period, and it might be reflecting aspects of structural reform that the reform index does not capture. These results, together with the estimate of the capital share parameter of 0.64, which is close to Chow’s (1993) estimate of 0.63, suggest that capital accumulation and efficiency improvements from labor reallocation and structural reform have been the main engines of growth in China. Because part of TFP growth was driven by one-time level adjustments, and because capital accumulation will taper off in the future as the Chinese economy matures, potential output growth can be expected to decline over the medium term.The Growth Outlook
Most analysts, as well as the Chinese authorities themselves, who are projecting average annual growth of 7 percent in the current five-year development plan (2001–05), believe that some slowdown in GDP growth is inevitable. The empirical findings described above provide support for this view. At the same time, however, China is still a relatively poor country and is likely to be able to continue catching up for many years to come. As neoclassical theory suggests, countries such as China that are relatively less developed and distant from the technological frontier in the industrial countries have a capacity for rapid growth if they mobilize and allocate physical and human capital effectively, adapt foreign technology to their factor proportions, and make good use of the opportunities for specialization that come from closer integration with the global economy.

Structural Policies for Future Growth
The discussion thus far in this chapter points to the necessity of intensifying and broadening economic reforms as a necessary condition for sustaining future growth of 7–8 percent a year. The reform areas most critical to China’s growth outlook are the following:

Reform of the financial and SOE sectors. Much remains to be done to strengthen the performance and financial health of the SOEs and the commercial banking system. In particular, extensive reforms to upgrade operational efficiency and product quality, to harden budget constraints, and to improve corporate governance in the SOEs are needed in the coming years. Similarly, bank rehabilitation will require far-reaching reforms, including the operational restructuring of the state commercial banks, the elimination of policy lending, and the development of a credit culture. The closely intertwined reforms of the SOEs and the financial sector must deepen if the efficiency of capital allocation in the Chinese economy is to be improved on a durable basis. SOE reform will also lead to scrapping of excess capacity, reflected in temporarily higher depreciation rates and slower output growth, but will result in a pickup in TFP growth over the medium term as the modernization of enterprises progresses and more productive capital is installed. Structural reform is expected to accelerate as a result of WTO accession.

Development of the nonstate sector. Realizing the nonstate sector’s potential to absorb workers laid off by SOEs, the authorities are attempting to foster the development of this sector, including by elevating the constitutional role of the private sector to one of parity with the state sector, and by taking some initial steps to improve nonstate firms’ access to bank credit and the stock market. Continued efforts to encourage private sector development will be necessary in the years ahead, for example reducing sectoral barriers to entry and providing better protection of private property rights by deepening the rule of law.

Increased factor mobility. The level of urbanization in China is very low, partly because of controls on the movement of labor from rural to urban areas. Some tentative steps have been taken recently to encourage the development of medium-size cities and towns, and the controls on the movement of labor into urban areas have been relaxed. However, China’s labor market will need to become considerably more flexible, and medium-size cities and towns will need to be developed, in order to facilitate the continued reallocation of the rural labor force to more productive uses. In addition to limiting the mobility of labor, government policies have also had a dampening impact on the mobility of capital across provinces (Zhao, 1998). Capital is likely to become more mobile in the future as internal barriers to trade and investment are dismantled following WTO accession and as financial sector reforms proceed.

A Future Growth Scenario
The empirical results of this chapter suggest that future TFP growth and rates of capital accumulation will be below their averages over the past two decades. In addition, the next steps in the reform process, which involve more labor shedding by SOEs and the shutting down of nonviable enterprises and outdated productive capacity, will cause somewhat greater disruption in the short to medium term than did the earlier reforms. Accordingly, the deceleration of TFP witnessed since the mid-1990s is likely to continue over the next several years as reforms, in particular the restructuring of SOEs, intensify. The average rate of investment is also likely to decline somewhat in the next few years as excess capacity is scrapped and the effective rate of depreciation of the capital stock increases.

The direct contribution of labor to output growth, which has been modest throughout the reform period, will become even more so as population growth continues to slow as a result of China’s population control policies. In addition, the further slowing of labor force growth and the rapid aging of China’s population will push up the dependency ratio, particularly after 2010, and cause the saving rate to fall. Labor’s indirect contribution to growth (reflected in TFP growth) through reallocation of workers from rural (agriculture) to urban areas (industry and services) should remain substantial for some time to come, although perhaps not quite as significant as in the past. However, an intensification of reform—in particular, labor shedding by SOEs—will reduce the capacity of urban areas to absorb labor from the countryside in the short and the medium run.

Although the effects of future reform are difficult to quantify, a possible growth scenario based on the estimates in this chapter is summarized in Table 2.4. Under this scenario, TFP growth remains below past levels as a result of a slowing of the outflow of labor out of agriculture (proxied by a slower decline in the primary sector’s share of the labor force), as layoffs increase further as a result of enterprise restructuring. Nevertheless, TFP growth should gradually pick up over the medium term as the positive effects of structural reform begin to prevail. Growth of the capital stock is projected to decline somewhat below historical levels because of a temporarily higher depreciation rate. The growth rate of potential output is projected to be 7 percent over the next few years.

Over the medium term, continued structural reform would eventually give new stimulus to TFP growth—not least by facilitating a pickup in the flow of labor out of agriculture into industry and services—and lay the foundation for faster TFP growth in the future, as the experience of other Asian countries suggests. The resulting improvement in efficiency as well as the updating of the capital stock should also sustain faster growth with lower rates of investment than in the past. Accordingly, the growth rate of potential output is projected to rise to 7½ percent on average during the second half of this decade, underpinned by the recovery in TFP growth to almost 1½ percent a year.

Conclusions
Labor migration out of agriculture, structural reform, and the partial reversal of the negative time trend are found to have raised TFP growth significantly during the reform period, and faster TFP growth in turn explains the substantial pickup in GDP growth in comparison with earlier periods. However, because many of these earlier reforms reflected one-time level effects, it is unlikely that future GDP growth will be able to match the levels witnessed during the reform period. China nevertheless remains a relatively poor country, and the scope for continued catching up with the industrial leaders will remain substantial for many years to come.

Capital accumulation will continue to be the largest contributor to economic growth in China. Whether TFP growth will also continue to play a pivotal role depends on the success of the next round of structural reform, and in particular on the progress with enterprise restructuring and banking system reform. Once the scope for further labor migration recedes, the pace of TFP growth will have to be sustained by the adoption of new technologies in the enterprise sector. To fulfill this role, SOEs need to be technologically upgraded and restructured according to market principles. Future technological progress will also require that the potential of China’s rapidly growing nonstate sector and the benefits of opening to the outside world be fully realized. The empirical results suggest that growth in the 7–8 percent range could therefore still be sustained over the next decade, provided the pace of structural reforms is intensified.

