January 21, 2019
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-01-21/china-opens-debt-taps-as-economic-growth-slows/10723396

When China's central bank makes its biggest single-day cash injection into its economy, should we be comforted authorities are managing a potentially nasty slowdown, or alarmed the mountains of debt in the world's second-largest economy are only getting bigger and more dangerous?

The initial take has been cautiously optimistic, but then again a sugar-hit is often far more palatable for markets than dealing with the heartburn of stacking on more debt.

The People's Bank of China (PBOC) injected a net 560 billion yuan ($140 billion) into the economy last Wednesday, and roughly 1.1 trillion yuan ($230 billion) for the week.

Authorities have been loosening restrictions on how much reserve capital banks need to hold, which in turn frees up more money to lend.

It was just the latest move in series of policy tweaks — including tax cuts and more public spending — announced in recent weeks.

So far it has been a cheaper, more "under-the-radar" tweaking, but things can escalate quickly if activity doesn't pick up in key sectors and jobs are shed.

Social stability is never too far away from such decisions.

Hard landing
Some idea of just how much the economy is slowing may be apparent in this weeks' GDP data release.

Year-on-year growth for the fourth quarter is tipped to come in at 6.3 per cent, which would be the weakest reading in almost three decades.

An official reading around 6.4 per cent would probably be fine from a central planning point of view.

It would bring GDP growth in line with the official target for 2018. It would also equal the 2009 GFC low and could also be used to justify even more stimulus.

Given the remarkable stability (and questionable quality) of the data, the actual number is probably less important than the direction — most independent analysts believe the Chinese economy is heading downhill more rapidly than planned.

Tipping point
For veteran China watcher, Stephen Joske, it is potentially a tipping point in terms of the economy's strength and the ability to keep stimulating it through Government policy.

"If it [a new stimulus package] is the size of 2015, it could increase the risk of a financial crisis in the next few years," Mr Joske said.

However for Mr Joske — who has worked in Beijing for both the Australian Treasury and The Economist's Economic Intelligence Unit, as well as advising Australian Super on investments in the region — a financial crisis blowing up in China is inevitable anyway.

"China's inability to stop stimulating is the cause of the problem, it is a question of when, not if," he said.

It is due, he says, to stimulus packages always ending up much larger than initially planned.

"When they loosen it up there's an orgy of lending authorities can't control … there's a big reliance on unrestrained business lending."

Sugar hit doesn't last
A case in point is 2015.

From late 2014 the monetary and fiscal lever-pulling included slashing benchmark interest rates by more than 1.5 percentage points and further easing of bank reserve ratios; the budget deficit swelled and state pension funds were urged to invest in equities for the first time, while fund managers also pledged to support the stock market.

It is hard to pin down an exact figure, but at least one Beijing University estimate valued the total stimulus well in excess of $US1 trillion.

By mid-2015 China's equity market jumped 50 per cent. Year-on-year GDP growth rebounded and held above 7 per cent.

The magic didn't last long. The stock market is now down around 25 per cent from early 2015 (and 50 per cent from its peak), while economic growth could well nudge below levels recorded in the depths of the GFC.

Mr Joske said the "disguised" lending, loans that didn't show up on the big banks' balance sheets, ran to "hundreds of billions of dollars".

"It was worse than inefficient. Comparing the lending and GDP data, a lot wasn't spent on anything, not even on building a road to nowhere," Mr Joske said.

"There are still a lot of questions about where it went."

Shadow lending crackdown
NAB's China economist Gerard Burg is somewhat more sanguine.

"A weak GDP figure has the potential to spook the markets, but it is not entirely a negative story," he said.

Mr Burg said he was reading a lot of information about stimulus in the media, but he was not seeing it in the data.

If anything, tougher regulations on shadow bank lending had pushed credit growth down to the lowest level in more than a decade he said.

Mr Burg argued China's deleveraging, or reining in of debt, was being undertaken in a measured way.

"New bank loans are being outpaced by cuts in shadow bank lending … really they are not trying to loosen policy, they are just trying to maintain liquidity rather than stimulate in a major way."

On NAB's preferred measure, total Chinese debt peaked at 325 per cent of GDP in late 2017 and has stabilised, or even edged down since then.

"The policymakers are trying to get banks to lend to SMEs [small-to-medium enterprises] rather than the state-owned sector, and we see this as a positive sign," Mr Burg noted.

The data appears to show authorities are having some success at moving lending away from the shadow banking sector to mainstream, regulated banks.

Last year non-bank lending accounted for 19 per cent of aggregate finance, half the 38 per cent share in 2017.

Domestic economy worries
Chinese authorities have vowed they would not "flood" the system with stimulus, but that resolve may be tested in coming months.

It is not just the external economy being weighed down by US tariffs that is a worry.

Factory activity is at the point of contracting and a range of figures from falling car sales, property prices and consumer confidence, as well as tumbling imports, shows the domestic economy and demand is an even bigger problem.

A recent survey from the Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BoAML) economics team in China found the economy was deteriorating more rapidly than before the stimulus packages of 2012 and 2015 were unleashed.

"In our view, it will prompt policymakers to further roll out easing measures to buffer the negative growth shocks," the big investment bank told clients.

"The recent Central Economic Work Conference confirmed top policymakers fully recognised the need to prioritise growth stability with more countercyclical easing measures.

"Going forward, faster credit expansion and property policy easing would be crucial to economic cycle rebooting in the coming months."

Given the massive size of the Chinese economy, it won't be an easy, quick or cheap fix to turn things around.

If the central planners hear the echoes of the 2015 "hard landing", the floodgates may again be opened and a massive new wave of indebtedness could be unleashed.