July 15, 2020
https://nationalpost.com/news/as-geopolitical-tensions-rise-chinese-investment-into-canada-continues-to-fall-data-show

OTTAWA — Chinese investment into Canada has continued to decline amid souring relations between the two countries, according to new data.

Total Chinese investment into Canada totalled $3.1 billion in 2019, according to data from the University of Alberta’s China Institute. That figure is well below the previous four-year average of roughly $5 billion per year, and lower still than pre-2015 levels when Chinese investment into Canadian natural resources was running at a record high.

A separate set of recent data, from the Asia-Pacific Foundation of Canada, shows Chinese investment totalling $21 billion between 2016 and 2019, down from $27 billion in the four years between 2012 and 2015.

Article content
The steady decline comes amid fraught relations between the federal Liberal Party and the Communist Party of China, which have deteriorated since the arrest of Huawei chief financial executive Meng Wanzhou. Canadian authorities arrested Meng, daughter of Huawei founder Ren Zhengfei, in December 2018 at the request of U.S. officials.

Slumping Chinese investment also comes after several years of lower foreign direct investment (FDI) into Canada overall, clouding efforts by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to boost foreign investment levels. Trudeau said in a 2016 speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland that attracting higher foreign investment would be a “key priority” for his government.

Gordon Houlden, director of the Alberta-based China Institute, said the drop is likely due to a range of factors, largely a collapse in commodity prices in mid-2014 that sent oil markets into a tailspin. China has invested $82 billion into Canada since 2000, more than $51 billion of which was funnelled into oil and gas, according to data from the China Institute.

But Houlden said heightened geopolitical tensions between the countries are also a “significant” factor, which could be nudging state-owned enterprises (SOEs) away from placing bets in Canada.

“If you’re an SOE employee reading state media every day, and there’s harsh criticism of Canada, you may or may not have been told to not go ahead with certain investments,” Houlden said. “You might ask yourself why you would go out on a limb. So there may also be some self-restraint happening there.”

Canada and China have continued to trade barbs since Meng’s arrest, and China has imprisoned two Canadian citizens — Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor — in what was viewed by many as retaliation. China has also barred imports on some Canadian goods such as pork and canola.

Chinese investors have shied away from Canada after making an ambitious push into the country in 2010 as part of the Communist Party’s “going out” strategy, in which it sought to rapidly build up its international asset base through strategic acquisitions.

Geopolitics is among the top five reasons why investment has fallen, but it’s not Number One

But many of those investments have gone sour, most notably the high-profile acquisition of Canadian oilsands giant Nexen by China National Offshore Oil Corp., a state-owned enterprise. The firm paid a premium on the $15-billion acquisition in 2012, and now sits atop an asset worth a fraction of that value.

“They made big mistakes, and that lack of profitability is an issue that I think has restrained them,” Houlden said.

Fears in Canada that China would use foreign acquisitions to advance its geopolitical agenda have also caused Canadian policymakers to tighten FDI rules — a shift that has further scared away would-be Chinese investors, according to experts.

Ottawa in 2018 rejected the proposed $1.5-billion takeover of construction giant Aecon Group by a Chinese firm, citing national security concerns. China lashed out at Canada for its “politicization” of the issue.

“We might have fallen off of their top-tier list of investments destinations,” said Kai Valdez Bettcher, researcher at the Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada.

Data from the foundation show that foreign investments by Chinese and non-Chinese state-owned enterprises has waned in recent years, while investments by smaller, nimbler private companies has been on the rise.

Some experts warn that Chinese firms, and particularly SOEs, can be used as a tool by the Chinese government to forward its foreign policy aims.

Lack of profitability is an issue that I think has restrained them

A House of Commons committee in recent weeks studied potential changes to the Investment Canada Act, which oversees the review of foreign takeovers. Several witnesses suggested a moratorium on Chinese investment into Canada for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, citing security concerns. Former Blackberry executive Jim Balsillie recommended a moratorium on Chinese investment into specific technology sectors, and suggested Canada establish a list of strategic sectors that would trigger automatic investment reviews.

Valdez Bettcher said wariness in China over foreign investment rules along with falling commodity prices are a better explanation for falling investment levels than recent turbulence between Canada and China.

“Geopolitics is among the top five reasons why investment has fallen, but it’s not Number One,” he said.

Foreign investment into Canada overall dropped in 2015, to $43 billion from $59 billion the year earlier, according to the United Nations. Those investment levels have continued their slump through the Trudeau years, but gradually increased back to $50 billion by 2019.