FEBRUARY 26, 2024
https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/02/26/china-starts-the-lunar-new-year-with-an-economic-hangover/#:~:text=China's%20population%2C%20particularly%20in%20rural,then%2C%20China's%20economy%20has%20weakened.

China Starts the Lunar New Year With an Economic Hangover
Can Xi Jinping pull the country out of a downturn?

At the end of January, a Hong Kong judge ordered the liquidation of the heavily-indebted Chinese real estate giant Evergrande. It was just the latest piece of bad news for China’s economy, after a year of disappointing growth, high youth unemployment, and various surveys and media reports that show a lack of confidence amongst China’s entrepreneurs and consumers.

Some observers have been predicting an economic collapse in China for decades. Others have long predicted that China would be stuck in a middle-income trap or some other type of economic stagnation. Might some of these predictions prove right this time? What does the Year of the Dragon have in store for consumers, companies, and markets? What should we look out for this year to understand both China’s real economy and its financial sector?—The Editors

China Doubled Down on the Wrong Model
I think we can all agree that China has followed an investment-driven growth model for over 40 years. It is never easy for a country to wean itself off this model, but instead of trying to do that, a few years back, China doubled down.


After the 2008 global financial crisis, fearing a bank contagion and declining exports, leaders put the investment model on steroids. Under instruction from Beijing, banks threw caution to the winds. In five short years, Chinese banks added loans worth the entire value of the U.S. banking system—which had taken 150 years to create, in a country with a much larger economy. Those loans went to industrial schemes and much more infrastructure than the country actually could justify, but very largely, to real estate.

The property mania that followed, with years of rising prices that helped encourage consumers to keep buying, created Ozymandian blights on the landscape: Replica cities including at least three “Little Manhattans,” three “Little Hong Kongs,” a mini-Paris, an “English village” complete with little red phone booths, replicas of Red Square, and many, many other toy cities, almost entirely unoccupied, as if re-creating the physical structures might magically bring to life the real thing, and Chinese people would find themselves living not in the dusty streets of Anhui or Hubei or Henan but among palm trees and burbling fountains in wealthy, leisured communities.

Not only did the construction fail to create wealthy communities, but the money invested in these projects has trickled away. Loans created deposits, and the stimulus generated cash. That cash, coursing through the economy, surged to crazy levels after 2009. People who had been farming barley or tending cows and seeing $10,000 a year in cash income suddenly had money to spend on cars and casinos and investment products.

But underneath the sudden wealth, basic incomes were not rising much, and investment in the intangibles that strengthen a population was neglected. China’s population, particularly in rural areas, has not benefited from the improvements in health and education that would have prepared them for a modernizing economy.

The illusion of property values that would rise forever was burst in 2021, and since then, China’s economy has weakened. What to do? The whole Chinese economy has kited atop property speculation, and no official dared allow it to stop. Now, banks say that 70 percent of assets are invested in the property sector. Bloomberg Economics calculates that a 5 percent fall in housing prices would equate a loss of 19 trillion renminbi ($2.7 trillion) in wealth.

Already, dozens of property developers have defaulted. Bank deposit rates have been pushed down, and the investment schemes that once offered better returns were swept away by regulators who want cash to return to the banks. Chinese consumers are becoming poorer.

To revive the old model and save the defaulting assets, the government would need to hose trillions on the economy. But all that cash would break the renminbi’s peg to the U.S. dollar, and that is a consequence the Chinese Communist Party cannot accept: It would mean massive capital flight, an angry populace, and the end of the dream of great wealth.

So, China’s leaders pace like caged tigers, lunging at half measures like new bond issues and a “stock market stabilization fund,” as if these efforts might bring back the glory days. But half measures will not work.

China has a huge economy, much of which is functional. Debt can be spread around for some time, and it is hard to say when the banks will demand massive cash injections to survive. But once that happens, the currency will deflate like an old party balloon, and the government will do its best to suppress dissent and close the borders. Those processes have already begun, and they foretell nothing good for 2024.

Everything Comes Back to Property
In the short run, China’s economic recovery in 2024 hinges upon four interrelated factors: property market stabilization, household consumption recovery, external environment improvement, and confidence in the economy restored.

The Central Financial Work Conference in October 2023 and the Central Economic Work Conference in December underscored the importance of risk prevention and resolution in three key areas: the property market, local government debt, and small- and medium-sized financial institutions. A necessary first step is stabilizing the property market by easing credit conditions to meet reasonable financing needs without fueling a new round of excessive borrowing.

Property market stabilization directly contributes to strengthening household balance sheets, creating a favorable environment to boost household consumption and expand domestic aggregate demand, all necessary to lift the Chinese economy out of the deflationary trap. Moreover, the property sector intricately links with local government off-balance sheet financing and small- and medium-sized banks’ lending. While the fall of Evergrande is not China’s Lehman Brothers moment and is unlikely to immediately spark a contagious wave of bank failures, its negative shock on the entire supply chain of the property sector, corporate creditors, and the small banks involved adds to the challenges facing China’s economic recovery.

Tensions with the United States are the top external challenge for China’s economic recovery in 2024, but not the only one. Complex global supply chain disruptions pose risks to Chinese exporters that are already operating on thin profit margins. The Red Sea crisis has disrupted the main shipping route between Asia and Europe, causing delays and raising shipping costs, lowering the profitability of Chinese exporters. The Suez Canal is a primary route for China’s westward goods shipments, including around 60 percent of its exports to Europe. A prolonged Red Sea shipping crisis would pile pressure on Chinese exporters and challenge the Chinese economy that is already battered by a looming property sector crisis, weak consumer demand, a shrinking population, and sluggish global growth.

Additionally, over 70 countries and over 4.2 billion people worldwide will hold elections this year, including major economies such as the United States, Russia, and India. The election results may affect and change the global business environment and market landscape in which Chinese companies operate.

In the long run, Chinese economic growth faces the challenges of the “4 Ds”: debt, demand, demographics, and decoupling (which some prefer to call “de-risking”). The first three Ds suggest that the Chinese economy is exposed to the risk of a Japan-style stagnation: Debt is soaring while growth is slowing down, and sluggish demand cannot catch up to overextended supply and adverse demographic trends. However, these risk factors do not necessarily suggest that the decline of the Chinese economy is inevitable. An improvement in the external environment combined with domestic structural reform can still boost the growth of the Chinese economy.

However, structural reform takes more than fiscal and monetary stimulus; it requires political incentive alignment that is hard to obtain.

