OCTOBER 17, 2022 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/2022/10/why-more-inward-looking-china-bad-news-world-economy

Why a more inward-looking China is bad news for the world economy
The increased role of geopolitics and ideology in Beijing’s economic decision-making is bad news not just for China but for the world.

We should adhere to self-reliance, put the development of the country and nation on the basis of our own strength, and firmly seize the initiative in development. To build a great modern socialist country in an all-round way and achieve the second Centenary Goal, we must take the road of independent innovation.

This quote by President Xi clearly outlines the inward tilt of Chinese economic policymaking that is now becoming increasingly obvious to the rest of the world. But it actually has deep roots. Ever since the 2008 global financial crisis, when the West’s reliability as a trading partner was thrown into question, self-reliance has become a more decisive organizing principle for Chinese officials.

As a result, the export-dependent growth model on which China built its economic rise in recent decades has been fraying. Exports as a share of China’s GDP peaked at 35 per cent in 2007 but had fallen to around 20 per cent by last year, a level not seen since before China’s accession to the WTO in 2001. This shows that net exports no longer make any meaningful contribution to Chinese GDP growth.

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has provided another geopolitical impetus to China’s pursuit of self-reliance.

Although China’s inward tilt may have started out as a response to purely economic phenomena – the post-crisis global recession, belt-tightening in the West, the eurozone crisis, and a general softening of global trade growth in the post-crisis years – geopolitical considerations are now dominant in shaping this shift toward self-reliance.

The role of geopolitics in pushing China towards a more inward-looking development path became clear in China’s response to the aggressive tariffs and export controls introduced by the Trump administration in the US. Because of these new constraints on China’s access to international markets and technology, Beijing sought to limit its dependence on the rest of the world.   

The most obvious result of this was the introduction of the ‘dual circulation’ strategy in May 2020, which sets out a rebalancing of China’s economy away from a reliance on external demand as a stimulus to growth (‘international circulation’) towards increased self-dependence (‘domestic circulation’). 

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has provided another geopolitical impetus to China’s pursuit of self-reliance. Since it is not far-fetched to think that China, like Russia, might one day also face coordinated sanctions, Chinese authorities must be thinking hard about how to respond to such a risk. 

Within China itself, a new emphasis on the role of the state is increasingly apparent – and seemingly rooted in ideology. 

The only credible strategy that China can adopt is to reduce its economic dependence on the West by creating, in effect, a kind of economic fortress, as its dependence on imported technology, food, and fossil fuels in particular, has created a substantial strategic vulnerability.

Over the next few years, Chinese policymakers will likely attempt to build up the country’s ability to supply its own semi-conductors, food, and green energy sources.

This new approach to economic policymaking isn’t just about China’s relationship with the rest of the world. Within China itself, a new emphasis on the role of the state is increasingly apparent – and seemingly rooted in ideology. 

The previous National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), in October 2017, made a push for ‘stronger, better, and bigger’ state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the past five years have indeed seen a measurable rise in the role that SOEs play in the Chinese economy. These firms now account for more fixed investment in the economy than private firms, for the first time since 2005.

Over the past year or so, what Chinese officials consider the ‘disorderly expansion of capital’ has been subjected to increased scrutiny. Beijing appears concerned that the private sector in China is no longer sufficiently aligned with the Communist Party’s political or societal objectives for the country. Regulatory crackdowns on private firms in the tech sector, private education and the gaming industry are the clearest examples of this concern. The authorities are now moving towards a traffic light system for the private sector, whereby Beijing decides what kind of private sector investment gets the green light. 

This all amounts to a Chinese economy that is less outward-looking and more state-dominated. For China itself, growth is likely to suffer, since there is a wealth of analysis to suggest that the efficiency of SOE-led investments is lower than that of the private sector. For the rest of the world, a China that is more inclined to buy its own stuff than import it means other countries will receive less of a boost to their economic activity per unit of China’s GDP. When geopolitics and ideology are driving decision-making, efficiency takes a back seat. And that is bad news for the world economy.

